look this is so much more interesting
than what I usually have to talk to
people but then again it's kind of what
I have been talking to people about out
more and more in the news I made notes I
went through the book very carefully
there really is so much in this book
that will defy expectation if I might
brag on it for a moment don't worry I'm
gonna cut you down for about 35 minutes
but first I'll start positive there
really is something this is a topic that
almost all of us in this room don't know
clinically the way s there does so for
us it's anecdotal its empirical its
episodic and when you look through the
book the different chapters are a
beautiful diagram of breaking through
your own expectations your own delusions
your own illusions so I was really
impressed no way all right but a page 47
there's a gross error No so these and
the topic itself the ten commandments -
arguably three deal with this issue we
were talking backstage I just did a
quick little bit of research in the last
three years in New York State now that
we don't have the same process for
dissolution of marriage anymore you have
functionally no-fault divorce well over
50% of the filings are infidelity based
and we now know that well over 50% of
marriages end so this is rampant this is
epidemic so I love your language when
you say universally forbidden and
universally practiced
the the so that I want to pose to you
the question that you posed here in the
beginning of your book where should we
begin when you want to take people
through this topic where's the right
place to start I'm gonna read it please
that probably actually answers part of
your question when I first became
interested in the topic of infidelity I
used to ask audiences if anyone had ever
experienced an affair not surprisingly
no hands went up there are not many
people who will publicly admit to
fooling around or being fooled bearing
this in mind I changed my question to
how many of you have been affected by
infidelity in your lives overwhelmingly
hands went up and have done so in every
audience I have addressed this query by
the way it's generally around 80% when I
ask the children of the lover in the
friend who's shoulder is wet from the
tears the friend who is listening to the
stories and of course the two major
protagonists a woman saw a friend's
husband kissing a beautiful stranger on
the train now the question of whether or
not she should tell her hangs heavy over
her friendship a teenage girl discovered
that her father's double life was as all
that she was a mother cannot fathom why
her son has stayed with that hussy as
she refers to her daughter-in-law no
longer welcome at Sunday dinners the
echoes of secret and lies resound across
generations leaving unrequited love and
shattered hearts in their wake I'll
continue afterwards but where I start is
basically here is this subject that is
ubiquitous that is the only commandment
that is repeated twice in the Bible once
for doing it and once just for thinking
about it
and it's funny because it's true and it
has existed since marriage was invented
and in many ways it has a tenacity that
marriage can only envy and yet it is
often treated with great judgment in
very polarizing ways and I thought we
can do better we need a new conversation
we need a new model that helps people
that is more compassionate that is more
empathic and helps people deal with this
crisis helps them get through it make
sense of it and then decide what they
want to do afterwards so how I began is
by questioning generally when I start
with the topic I start by looking at
what was I told how was I trained what
do I want a question here does this
really appear the way that I was told it
was and if not I start to go one by one
at all the assumptions that underlie the
conversation because if I change the
assumptions I change the practice
however one of the fundamental problems
here is that you are asking for people
to have an open mind on something that
has always been culturally very
absolutely despite the ubiquitousness of
it it's wrong and if we discuss it in
any way where you mitigate the wrongness
at all that's dangerous
so I can't have an open mind it has to
be wrong and if it ever happens they're
gone right how do you get past that when
are you going back to the book and going
back to the book because this was
literally you know I couldn't move in
the book until I had answered these
questions right every time I would tell
people I'm writing they would say are
you for or against as if there's only
two options and I would say yes you know
and maybe with a more cryptic answer I
could try to uncover some of the deeper
layers of these
of this issue I have every time I say I
write about this I say this is not a
justification this is not a condoning
understanding doesn't make it right and
sometimes things are hurtful that
doesn't mean they're wrong and this is a
big cultural distinction now the numbers
aren't that different when you cross the
pond to Europe versus the United States
but how about the cultural expectations
how is this received in the United
States versus let's say in France so I
have a French accent but I am NOT French
but you said in France earlier that's
why I said it wrong cultural it's
presented as the kind of day you know
the on the other side of discussion I
think probably one of the big
differences between a Latin European
perspective and here is that it is it
doesn't hurt any less let's be very
clear
it doesn't hurt any less but it isn't
always experienced as wrong it is
experienced as hurtful it doesn't have
the same moral code attached to it and
it can be just as gutting betrayal is
betrayal deception is deception lies is
lies but there is something about one's
understanding that such thing can happen
it's a bit of a yielding to the reality
of life that you get so there is less of
a shock that this could happen to me
that is probably one of the nuances of
difference and you're right the numbers
are not different infidelity is the
leading cause of divorce one of them at
this point not different in Denmark or
in France or in the US and that is what
I think is really important for us to
understand is what what are the ravages
of modern infidelity how has this become
the reason for ending relationships to
the extent that it does
does it hurt differently today than it
used to what is specific to modern love
and to the way we experience the
breaches of trust and the betrayals of
love today deep the one of the aspects
of this is deep
this is the it makes me uncomfortable
but I want to know more I feel like why
shouldn't be too curious you know it's
yeah it's not easy you know you're lucky
that you guys have the lights on you
because I know there's a lot of oh not
me I would never what she just said I've
never thought that in my life but why is
that page folded over because it's so
not who I am the ending what your wife
to the oh you threw me there first when
so my wife when I was getting ready to
do this
my wife had heard about the book and a
talk from a different friend and when
she saw the book uh-huh in the apartment
she said what are you reading that for
that's far too deep for you this book
and I said I thought it was about how to
start fires here in the arm
so language language matters you spend a
lot of time and it's one of the things
that's helpful I think and the
discursive Nisour this book is language
non monogamists as a category is
something that will be an interesting
proposition for people non-monogamous
and fooling around
even as loose vernacular you make a very
strong case that there's really nothing
fooling around about infidelity I know
we refer to it that way but that was
probably some type of inoculation
against the reality of what it truly is
that we started calling it fooling
around so let's start with that why do
you think it was called that when
clearly the hurt the pain and the
realities of it fly in the face of that
type of you know a harm harmless label
because certain words are meant to take
the gravitas out of it if you say I
fooled around you're trying to say don't
worry it wasn't a big deal
it's not a real threat to us it didn't
mean anything but there is a lot of
feeling when you try to make something
be meaningless it doesn't mean there is
no feeling in lack of meaning so you
come up with a language by which you're
trying to do some false reassurance
sometimes that also curtails your
accountability and you say it was just
fooling around the the whole vocabulary
of this topic is you know could be a
study on its own there is no morally
neutral terms the language is often so
judgemental that it collapse it clasps
in its bosom the impossibility of of
talking about it and then it actually
stops the conversation you know every
time I would write a line I would feel
like I had three others that I needed to
add in order to round it up around the -
- because everything stood when it stood
alone just took on a meaning of its own
and then it just took off and I felt
like I had to constantly qualify it
contextualize it
layer it so that it really took on the
truth of life and the fact that love is
messy and infidelity even more so non
monogamists yes
sounds like a pass those sounds like
they're gonna get a pass people won't
want to call people non monogamists
because we're supposed to be monogamous
if we're in the marrying state of mind
all those great quote 1908 GB Shaw that
paraphrasing that marriage is among the
most insane delusive passions that
requires you to swear that you will
remain in that state until death which
you know which was smart once I read it
three times because my wife was right
you know I didn't get it the first time
was that you come into it you'd make a
distinction between a rata sysm marriage
romance you know that the language
matters these things mean different
things you come into it one state of
mind through passion that is not the
sustaining principle and most of these
true partnerships of marriage and that's
something people don't know when they
get into it and they can't figure out
how to reconcile when they're trying to
figure out whether or not they have to
get out of it so this whole discussion
this whole topic is right in the center
of it so how do you get people open to
the idea that they need to look at the
infidelity as more than just its own
reality
you know they mean that it's more
important to examine to be open to than
just the fact that it happened because
where we end our analysis right so many
people will tell me that in the
aftermath of an affair they are actually
having conversations with the level of
depth and honesty that they haven't had
in years
is this the non-monogamous hours this
this is this is you know this is the
copper this is both of them people
sometimes look some Affairs are break it
so I don't get to see much of
they go to the lawyer the others come to
me so I have people that want to remake
it it's different or they want to figure
out if there is something left with
which to remake something and they may
or may not do that together but they are
giving each other some time otherwise
they that's not me they call and in when
I say the non-monogamous I I needed what
was I gonna call these people all the
time cheaters betrayers philanderers
perfidy womanizer
what's the vocabulary so I chose one but
that was all very effective I want I'd
used every word I could and on occasion
I also could use the one that was not
monogamous because because I I began to
understand a number of things and one of
them was that if I just call this person
the betrayer there were times when in
fact this betrayal was one of many in
the relationship and that betrayal
sometimes comes in many forms
indifference neglect contempt violence
it was often very tempting to want to
see this betrayal as the one that tops
all others and societies on the side of
the person who went elsewhere not on the
person but on societies on the side of
the person who withheld not on the
person who went elsewhere and so I also
on occasion just called it
non-monogamous not because it was an
endorsement of anything but it was one
descriptor to say this person wasn't
less committed this person wasn't less
of a parent this person wasn't less of a
breadwinner this person this person was
the one who was non-monogamous what do
you see as the right way to approach an
understanding of whether or not
something can be learned from the
infidel
so you're sitting in there that the room
with one of them
if you're lucky both of them and this
comes out as something where they
believe this is the end of the
conversation
this happened that's it there's nothing
worth talking about there's no value in
this other than the fact that it
happened how do you see the infidelity
what are the possibilities of positive
growth that come out of something like
that so if you come to me the day after
I will tell you in this moment you have
just been broken shattered gutted you
don't believe anything I don't I know
you don't trust him or her but I also
know that you probably don't even trust
yourself and your own perception it
isn't just because you feel like you've
lost your partner but you sometimes feel
like you have lost your sense of self
you have a crisis of identity you are
undergoing at this moment this is not
all in one breath you know the the
shattering of the grand ambition of love
which is really why I think this has
become so beyond painful in the way more
than it used to be and I normalize it
and I normalize it and I say to the
other person did you imagine this did
you at any moment consider this and you
know sometimes they have and sometimes
they haven't and when they see the
person break in front of them it is just
unbearable to know that I am the one who
caused that the next thing I want to see
in the learning is is the person who
hurt the other person able to have
remorse and guilt for what they have
done even if they think that what they
experienced there was very important to
them
you still created something here are you
able to own that and that means that you
have to be able to take in with empathy
the pain the raw pain that is in front
of you and then from there we go through
a trajectory that covers the crisis
phase and then the inside phase and then
the vision phase and one of the things
that I know will help people in what
they will learn is not the first phase
the first phase I can go into details
but it really is you know what I do is I
provide calm structure reassurance and
sometimes I have to say your experience
and your feelings about the affair are
not the same as your experience and your
feelings about your entire 26 years
together
don't make this become the fatal blow
that redefines all of that because it's
not always like this for everything I'm
gonna say I'm gonna say there is other
examples you know it's like so then if I
see people who are able in the midst of
this fraca
to also say you know but I know that
while this was going on you know he or
she has been there for my dying parent
he or she has been there like Dawson in
the book one of the I'm sure that's not
his real name but one of the people I
just want to interrupt because I thought
it was an interesting flip on this so
Dawson is one of the people in the book
one of the couples that has been through
the therapy and he says I was there for
you when your brother came to live with
us I was there with the cancer I was
there for you with all these things you
can't just judge me by where I and then
there's a different phrase that he uses
alone you can't judge me by this alone
how often is there any type of positive
reception to that idea it depends when
in the process two days after no
seriously you have lost your entire
quota of entitlement you are done you
have lost your entire credibility so
what are you in this conversation
there's a lot of people here this is me
talking to Dawson I got to get up in 2
hours and 15 minutes now I'll never go
to sleep I want you to know that so
immediately you can't do that because
you have no sense of anti-aging it's all
about in the in the first moment the
focus is on the person who has just
woken up one person's nightmare may be
ending but the other one has just
started let's be very clear you may have
told this you know because you can sleep
anymore three years later because you
wanted to be good because you wanted to
come clean you know did you do this for
me
or did you do this for you so now that
I'm sure what I'm being accused of right
now so you're saying that when he comes
forward when Dawson says okay I admit it
that's for him sometimes that's not
doing anything that's very conciliatory
yes sometimes you really want to know
did you do this because you were
actually thinking that that's what your
partner wants to know or did you do this
to cleanse your conscience and what is
the other person to do with this now
you've got them all against me now you
happy you know I have worked I think
it's important to kind of say when you
say it's not his name I had 1500 letters
after I gave the TED talk about Affairs
the majority of the people who wrote to
me we're hurt men and straying women the
two groups that talk to least then I
went around the globe and I have worked
with hundreds thousands of people on
this thing and there is not one word in
this book that is inventive but that
also says that there isn't one story
there this is a broad topic you know
when you go into the Dawson he happened
to have been there for his wife and then
he says to her and this is going to
become everything about me I've heard
the
but I've also heard you know where he
was nowhere to be seen where he's
emptied the life savings
okay you know it this is a he that I'm
thinking about and and that that convert
those words coming out of this or or
another guy who I think Ian wrote about
him and I remember he was like you you
know I would never do earth sure I would
never you know I have least I'm not
sleeping and this and he meanwhile had
mistreated her terribly for years for
years and I finally just really had to
say you know my dear betrayal comes in
many forms you really think you have the
moral superiority because you didn't do
that and to myself I thought maybe you
just not nice enough
see that's the tricky one of this the
whole thing is just that hits home
awesome the this is a sticky wicket this
entire discussion which is why the books
genius in its actuality in its
authenticity is very helpful because
there's stairs saying there's nothing
there's nothing really it's all
subjective right of course it is but
that these are actual clinical
experiences is very helpful in
understanding it because this idea of
okay you did the bad thing but now we
have to be open to this discussion of
what is a bad thing
what is perfidy what is this what is a
breach of faithfulness what is the
breach of the valve and if somebody
you'll hear this it didn't happen for no
reason now that is another tricky
component of this because you can't
blame the victim but in the therapeutic
setting you wind up coming around to the
idea of well if we want to see something
if we want to sustain if we want to
persist after this event we have to
understand what went into it I read it I
get it I remember it from your first
book as well that is not an easy thing
to coach the victim
because why does somebody want to be
open to what it is that they could have
possibly done that would make this
person do something that was so obvious
and hurtful that is never the way I
think you created a causality now yes
why would you use and then it becomes
blaming the victim yes I am looking at a
context there is a relationship I look
at the relationship in its entirety and
I want to know is there something that
happened in the context of the
relationship that was going on as well
you still made your choice alone two
people are responsible for the
relationship one person chooses to have
an affair that is very clear but
sometimes these experiences have nothing
to do with the relationship that is one
of the biggest surprises for me in
writing explain that how does it ever
how can it have nothing to do with the
relationship I love my wife I love my
husband I love my husband between two
men two women I'm having an affair I
have no intention of leaving I have no
intention of going anywhere else
what we have is dear to me I am
experiencing something I never in my
lifetime thought I would do the majority
of people that I see are not chronic
philanderers they are people who have
often been faithful for years decades
they themselves find themselves crossing
a line they never thought they would
cross and then I begin to find out what
is it and that idea what you have just
said is one of the big assumptions that
that guides the conversation at this
moment Affairs are a symptom of a
problem relationship either there's
something wrong in your relationship
either there's something wrong in you
but it is a symptom model it's a
deficiency model and in fact sometimes
the meanings in them you know have been
the motives have to do with loneliness
and and and resentment and rejection and
sexual frustration and all the negative
stuff that can happen but sometimes it
has nothing to do with that and that to
me became much more interesting it's
like it's like a mating in captivity
well I would not have written a book
about people who
don't get along and don't want to be
sexually intimate with each other that's
so what but people who would come in and
say we love each other very much we have
no sex that became really a question for
me and the same thing began to happen
here I my partner is an amazing person
and they go on and on and on and I'm
having an affair which is not always
described as I'm having an affair
sometimes is can you love two people at
the same time the questions become very
different and from that place I decided
that I'm not going to always look at it
blanket as just a symptom but I will
look at it for its own meaning and when
you explain that to a partner you know
it's a very different story this has
nothing to do with you you had a good
relationship and you are an incredible
partner the fact that you're going to
understand what may have happened how
you lost each other how you became
complacent to each other how you cease
to have any depth with each other how
you all those things that happen in
marriages that is that is not a cause
that is not a blame and to shift the
conversation from from reaction to
reflection from blame to understanding
is ultimately what helps people overcome
this overcome this so that do you know
so that they don't destroy everything
they had because of that sometimes it
has to but not always what do you think
the numbers are look I did not deal with
numbers because the numbers about you
know are from 28 to 70% or depending on
the definition there's too much
subjectivity in terms of the actual
circumstances no universally agreed-upon
definition of infidelity so the I went
for the stories behind it I worked like
an ethnographer story after story to try
to see other themes here and and I came
up with a few themes that I hear for the
people who do it so that when I would
ask myself why do people do this thing
why would people risk losing everything
they have been together for what for
what and it's not for sex
not only it's a little more complicated
than that so I you know we don't know
the numbers if there's a subject that
people lie about it's sex and even more
so forbidden sex so men exaggerate men
boast
men inflate and women have always had to
face much more dire consequences
including the nine countries where she
can still be killed for straying and so
she has learned to be quiet but we don't
know the truth about these things all we
know in the past is that there were all
kinds of babies that didn't have the
color of your hair and now we don't have
that anymore so now what is it is it
porn is it the chatroom is it a massage
with a happy ending is it going back on
Facebook to reconnect with your exes is
it staying active on your dating apps
what you're already seeing somebody for
X amount of time where where where is
that line you say that the line is that
there's an equation there what creates
infidelity full disclosure I was gonna
skip this over when I was going through
the book I was like I know what it is
and I just read through all of it
actually I really have no idea but where
that where the line is where it isn't
because yes their poses these fail you
know if the person's online you know
what is that what if he never meets
somebody or what if she never meets the
person but this is what if it's just an
emotional connection there is no
emotional connection so you came up with
three components secrecy sexual alchemy
which would be a great name for a band
by the way and emotional involvement so
take us through that how does that take
shape so because we've been seeing this
right I mean with with social media
adaptations and we know the scandals
that we've seen publicly about it but
well I never met them well it's just
online you know I don't even know I
don't even know who they are how do you
adapt these three components to it and I
get that the line and where you come up
in the book is it's subjective obviously
people are going to weigh these things
differently of course but how do those
components play out in terms of what
should have in mind when they're
analyzing behavior so I'm gonna link
this to something that you were asking
me before when I said to you that so
many times people have dis conversations
afterwards this what I'm going to tell
you now is part of the conversations
that you wish people would have when
things are good in the relationship not
after a crisis it's like this crisis
propels you to the essence and then you
start to actually talk for real because
people avoid them before and why is it
subjective it's subjective because you
no longer have major religious
institutions and you no longer have
pregnancy and mortality and some big
things to kind of define the lines today
on the internet you can have massive
amounts of engagement that are sexual
without being physical
what does that mean you know so I
decided I would look at it structurally
by definition an affair or any
infidelity is organized around a secrecy
the secret is the constitutive element
of this subject if it's not secretive
it's about something else
and that secret it has multiple
ramifications because it is also
intergenerational it gets passed on but
from generation to generation these
secrets they become part of the DNA of
people's lives
the secret is corrosive on one side and
can be very titillating on the other the
secret is for many people the place
where for the first time they're
actually experiencing something that is
just their own but then you need to
match that with emotional involvement to
one degree or another I mean even
hit-and-run has a certain commercial
component to it so there is a human
dimension to that and human emotional
experience to it from a full love affair
and a parallel life to an anonymous
hookup there is feeling and then the
most interesting one for me was the
concept of sexual alchemy and alchemy
became the key word because when I would
ask people all over the world what is
one thing that they experienced the word
that they came up
no alchemy no what is alive alive they
feel alive I would never come up with
that it doesn't matter how many words
they feel alive they feel like for the
first time in a long time they
experience a sense of aliveness of
energy of renewal of vitality that they
haven't felt in themselves or in their
life in a long time okay so when they
say that the immediate pushback is you
are so selfish that you wrecked did that
just for that with all these other
responsibilities and things you don't
think that I want to feel alive you get
to go feel alive and I'm not alive and
now by the way you killed me essentially
so now you're alive and I'm dead and all
because of what you do that's right
that is the show it is selfless
welcome to my life
it is selfish affairs are plots of
entitlement Affairs are things that you
give to yourself with a host of
rationalizations for why you deserve it
always and indeed sometimes my aliveness
kills you and you are gonna tell me you
think I liked it the way this was know
because now I have you know an affair
will light up the scorecard of a
relationship and all the compromises
that you are willing to make for the
greater good
you done because I have taken out all
the reasons for why you were willing to
accept things that you didn't want to
accept but you didn't do what I did
which sometimes you're jealous about
which sometimes you're even jealous
about you would never do it but you
wished you could have done it it's this
kind of thing so you mad at me twice
really you're mad at me that I did it
and you're mad at me that I did it and
you didn't yes yes that sounds like
marriage that's like a real you know
that's where it really gets in there you
know that's it so the heaviest piece of
metal in the world it's amazing the
weight that comes with the ankle
because that would never exist in any
other relationship you're mad at me for
what I did and you're mad because you
didn't do it
yes that's only in marriage it doesn't
ever do it goes further and it goes
further and then the alchemy is really
this idea that you know the kiss that
you only the erotic is such that a kiss
that you only imagine giving can be just
as powerful as hours of lovemaking you
don't have to have the act to have the
energy longing is fully understood that
with your erotic mind you can live an
entire life an entire love story in your
head that takes you completely away from
your partner without ever touching
anybody and that's wrong
because you really sold it when you said
it there that's why I was reminding them
it's not a how-to course that were given
here the third component then winds up
being the one that used to be said in
isolation emotional involvement right
this is something that's been used as an
excuse and an explanation time in
memoriam with this she meant nothing he
meant nothing to me it was nothing more
it was no sex
therefore it meant not and then in the
social media it's okay you never met
them but you're like really into them
you're connected to them it's emotional
and that's even more hurtful than the
physical that's how we've seen those
made manifest
what is your reckoning on that dynamic
you know for me to understand emotional
infidelity since from my wife I knew
this was gonna happen
these are just questions for later I
have all the time I can't go home so
it's it's fun naki keep going so the
emotional involved emotionally in what
is called to the emotional infidelity is
that you have gone to someone else to
share parts of yourself that you ought
to share with me that I expected you to
share with me and a part of that has to
do to that concept of emotional
infidelity really is rather recent and
it comes along with the more marriages
became the quest for the soulmate
so journalist I'll explain listen I you
can say it's right it's wrong it's right
well I am trying to give dignity to the
people and if I'm just gonna say one
word things I will never help the people
who come to me because I can think this
is wrong but I'm also seeing this person
who still wants to live with this person
what am I going to say to this person
I'm gonna shame him or her for still
caring loving even admiring the person
that has just cracked him open and I
have to be able to hold both things
that's why I continuously work from a
dual perspective what it did to me and
what it meant for you if I just go and I
cut you I also cut the life line of this
person who sometimes wants to find a way
to feel okay about still choosing to be
with you which today has often become
the new shame it used to be that divorce
was the stigma now it's choosing to stay
when you can leave that's the new stigma
that's the Hillary Clinton story and
that means now that not only do I have
your secret but on top of it I'm
protecting you to my friends to whom I
cannot talk now because they're going to
judge me for not throwing the dog and
the curb so now I have a double secret I
lie about what you've done to me and I
allowed to them about the fact that I
still want to be with you and because of
that I can't just go and throw these
kinds of words at people not in my role
two questions
yes one is for you but I'll ask that
second I can't really see so you have a
little bit of a degree of N and M no
it's better this way no I'll tell you
why who after listening because this is
you know objectively this is very
persuasive this is somebody who spent so
many years understanding something not
just conceptually but empirically seeing
it lived out that's it's a that's a
dynamite combination how a show of hands
it's not the question you think it's
kind of big although you deserve it
after how you've been laughing at me for
the last 35 minutes who is open to the
idea that god forbid this ever happened
haha but God forbid this ever happened
in your own life god forbid nobody wants
to have to deal with this although maybe
there is something that positive that
could come out of it but we'll put that
to the side who's even open to the
possibility that you would try to
weather that kind of storm and find a
way through it and stay with the person
what a bunch of liars look at it this is
a more honest answer than the one you
typically get I would have raised my
hand if I were there especially if I
thought I had any eye contact with you
okay
so that's it that's interesting right
because do you make of this me nothing I
ask question and my question for you
yeah I've given enough the here's my
question for you and I see how you've
spelled it out here several different
ways with the range of moral backstops
that people have here there's an
interesting dialogue component to the
book where it's this happened well it's
always wrong that guys got to go and
somebody said well hold on you know
that's we have to be a little bit more
subjective and then there's you know
they know it's not subjective do you
ever think maybe when you were coming up
with non-monogamy
as a concept do you ever think to
yourself this is a really hard thing for
people to be in successfully over a long
time that marriage really really is work
hard not unnatural but difficult
difficult okay difficult man please so
our model today is that I want you to be
whatever we always wanted from marriage
companionship economic support family
life social status I also want you to be
my best friend my trusted confidant my
passionate lover for the long haul a
long haul that's twice as long as it
used to be I want you to be my best
parent my intellectual equal
the one to inspire me in my career I
want you to be my anchor and my wave I
want you to offer me security and
stability and predictability and I want
you to give me transcendence and all a
mystery and surprise it's one person to
give us what once an entire village
choose to provide that is the modern
concept
hence it goes further it goes further
because I there's a union analyst Robert
Johnson who I thought gave me away and
it's something to think about that was
really brilliant in our secularized
society romantic love has become the
most important engine of the Western
psyche so we turn to romantic love for
things that we used to turn for in
religion ecstasy meaning wholeness
transcendence all of those things we
used to look for in the sanctuary of the
divine and today I want you my beloved
to offer all these things to me so when
you say marriages work I always ask you
which model of marriage first then I
will know which is the work we need to
do marriages of today that managed to
meet this in which we conflate the
spiritual and the relational by calling
our partners our soulmates do better
than all the marriages of the past
that's the research of Eli Finkel in his
new book but the vast majority can't
meet this new Olympus you understand the
why is it always that I don't understand
I think I'm thinking I'm thinking I
might keep telling you it's deep so it's
deep let's dig you had like you know 30
variables that go into the marriage if
you listen to what people tell each
other in the vows is this when they get
mad when they make their own oh my god I
hate that
was that just me I hear and I'm like oh
listen to this guy with thee you know
that he got like a look at her as a day
before he like you know just cranked it
out he called his one friend it was a
lit match you know but he promises her
the moon you know and you think my god
if these people succeed till first
honeymoon that will be amazing
it's like what people are so it has
always been when you pick a person you
pick a story and this is the story
you're gonna write together and it has
you edited you edit it I one day came up
with this lion after mating and it just
became one of the most hopeful lines
actually when I work with people who are
struggling with infidelity I said most
of us these days are gonna have two or
three marriages or two or three
committed relationships in our adult
life some of us are gonna do it with the
same person alright so how does that
manifest itself it means we you know we
got together and we had one particular
contract with each other about into
dependency one particular style of
relationship in which we negotiated our
what was separate and what was together
one particular power dynamic between the
two of us one set of rules around sexual
boundaries between the two of us all
kinds of things that at some point
people we knew their license regularly
people don't renew their marriage ever
they think that they think that they
began with in their 20s or 30s just is
gonna go like that for thirty forty
years without ever sitting down and just
saying how is this Union how is this
little enterprise of us doing what's it
like for you where are we at shareholder
meeting yes yes yes marriage shareholder
meeting in which people actually you
know but not from a consumer perspective
is this a good deal for me you know am I
getting my needs met but really what
have we built together what matters to
us here how do you see this continuing
what are the things that that that would
make you want to go elsewhere do you
think they need a therapist to help
through that part of the transition
or do you think that can be done in
isolation between the two of you so I
don't have to tell you my gut on it is
it's a tough renegotiation if you
whoever opens that subject I think is
looking for a beat-down yeah I think
whoever says hey you know I'd like to
grab some coffee today you have to oh
you have time no but that's me I want to
rethink you know if you want coffee or
do you want to talk about our marriage
I'm gonna want to drink it in a very
soft cup in case it gets thrown at my
head I think it's going so how do you
motivate because I think it's actually
something how many of you are married or
in committed relationships of any kind
please it's like less hands went up wow
this is really helpful this book is it
Teresa who's married you get one coroner
committed less hands I mean if that
doesn't tell you the truth of the
situation nothing I usually ask a
difference if we just answered how many
of you would like to be in a
relationship no II would like to be out
of the relationship
at least on occasion this is also a good
show of hands of the people who didn't
come with the other person that they're
with I tell you why I bring it up there
we all know anybody who's in a committed
relationship knows that it's work and so
commonly even outside a major crisis you
see people are not committed to the work
and we all know couples like that in our
own lives where somebody's just so
grossly advantaged and disadvantaged
within it but I think that the idea of
how you broach this subject is a
meaningful one because I think there's a
lot of utility to it not not to sanitize
this or make it antiseptic but you have
life changes you know you get married
you're one age you're one set of dreams
one set of aspirations life changes and
is made manifest and whatever happens
between you and there is a need for RIA
proach Minh figuring out how is it
different now you know now we're raising
kids
well now the kids are grown now what do
we do I mean these are all
huge things that certainly can't just
easily evolve without any kind of
reconsideration that's why I wonder what
is the right mechanism for the look it's
very clear to me that every relationship
anybody like this first I imagine a
world where people can experience a
sense of vitality and aliveness in their
relationship
why because ultimately it's the quality
of our relationships that will determine
the quality of our lives more than
anything else
friendship hasn't changed too much in
the last 200 years sibling relationship
hasn't changed too much if there is one
being unit that has undergone an extreme
makeover it's the couple and in the past
you heard every fight that couple had
because the walls were porous and the
windows were open today your friends can
divorce and you're surprised because you
didn't see it coming that's the kind of
isolation that most couple live in more
pressure to succeed more pressure to be
happy more pressure to do well and less
input more time with the kids more time
at work and less with each other with a
list of expectation that's like that so
to then say that you know what on
occasion you go to a retreat you go to
therapy you sit with a few friends
together that you really trust and you
are and you analyze life every other
organism needs to grow in order to
thrive if it goes stale it will
fossilize and what happens sometimes
unfortunately is that this crisis
propels people to actually you know what
happens in the beginning of a
relationship you live face-to-face and
you gazing into each other and then you
spend years living side-by-side and what
this crisis does to some people is it
puts them back face-to-face to realize
what they stand to lose to realize that
they actually loved each other and they
haven't said it to each other in so long
to realize that they actually wouldn't
imagine a life without each other and
that raw pain is actually shared by both
people and it's that that you want to
reconnect them with because what do I
want to know if I
still if I remember it if we work
distinct true is that you choose we
choose each other again and we're
starting a second marriage with each
other that's when this thing can
actually produce something that you
don't wish it you know it didn't need to
happen for that but sometimes nothing
else seemed to have done it nothing else
had the force of ravage that this thing
could draw people in questions from the
audience
oh this is a villain all right
when would you tell the non-monogamous
don't tell PS that's my advice to
friends who ask me am I wrong it's a
great question so you know
why do you want to tell and what is it
you want to say do you want to say what
is it you want to say I've fallen in
love somewhere else I slept with
somebody I got stuck in a hotel I have I
have an STI what is it you need to tell
is that telling caring for the person
that you're saying it to or is that
caring ultimately making you feel better
do you have any idea if your partner
wants to know if that person's partner
wants to know do you do you know and you
don't know in advance so many people
thought they wanted to know and then
tell me I wish I had never known I can't
get it out of my head you know but what
I say is slow it down don't just say yes
or no slow it down there are
consequences and the price to
truth-telling and there are consequences
and the price to secrecy and sometimes
when a person asks a question ask them
first do you want to know the answer to
your question or do you want your
partner to know that you have the
question it's like I want you to know
that I'm thinking about this but I'm not
so sure I want the answer because once
you have the answer your entire life is
about to change
don't when you have friends I think
sometimes the best thing is to let them
figure it out and to ask them the right
questions and not to push our own
opinions on them because we never have
to live with the consequences of that
they do what are the best words to use
when you would like to end a
relationship with someone and they want
to work on it
those are beautiful questions what you
want is marvelous what you want is
beautiful I wish on anyone else to have
somebody who wants to continue and to
persevere the way that you don't want to
do it with me but I don't want to
anymore I don't want to be with you
anymore
I want to go and I want you to bring
that energy and that fervor and that
commitment to someone who will be able
to respond I can't say goodbye without
ever hurting you this will hurt badly I
will live with that forever but I have
made up my mind
we have to be willing to own that you're
going to break someone's heart and that
you're gonna live with you can't have it
both ways I don't feel the same way
about you now that I did before you said
I mean this is one of the many verses
yeah that's just right no but that's
just terrible to hear sister I'm not
even focused on the questions now I just
I don't even know what I'm gonna do now
how do you explain oh this is good
how do you explain and define the
infidelity to the children do you
discuss or hide so first of all my first
question is always how old are the kids
the question is a developmental question
you do not answer the same way to a
four-year-old that probably should not
be mired into the adult messes so a 12
year old who stumbled on your computer
or to a 14 year old who doesn't
understand why you are leaving their
mother or their father which they
thought you have a life with and cannot
understand because you can't tell them
my husband hasn't touched me in 12 years
what are you going to say to them you
want them in your bedroom No so by
definition you're going to try to say
positive things about the partner and
you will be accused as the person who is
unfaithful for destroying the family who
should do the talking I think that it is
every parent with every child alone you
talk differently to different children
who goes first I mean I have plenty of
examples of the children I have one case
in the podcast actually in where should
we begin where the children three of the
children - one of them doesn't talk to
her because she chose to stay with him
he cheated on her for forty years and
and dating she has Stockholm Syndrome
and they just cannot accept that she to
hurt they don't talk to her let alone to
him then I have the person who is the
person who leaves with someone else and
has never talked about anything to their
children about their marriage but why
would they and certainly not about what
happens in the bedroom of their marriage
and then you know when they leave the
adult kids one doesn't invite him to the
wedding the other doesn't you know so
it's different scenarios with different
children you have by that stage a very
personalized relationship with each
child and they will have different
conversations with you it's not a pact
it's not like when you have parents who
are going to announce to their children
that they are divorcing and they're
presenting you know this is we will be
changing our family from here on this is
a very different story and the degree to
which you involve people i I am of the
belief that if your children are not
part of that story
you don't involve them I've had people
who tell the five-year-old why mommy is
crying and he should know and they know
what kind of a a-hole his father is and
what is that is doing to the child so
there is people who use the children to
share with them they rage their raft
their broken hearts their vengeance
there are people who have the children
who stumble on a whole digital archive
and need to help these children make
sense of who is this father of theirs
you know what are these when it's
digital archive it's a parent it's a
mother of thought it doesn't matter who
is this person who just you know what is
all of this and then it's a different
conversation and it's a it's not a
one-time conversation this story is
going to unfold over years
I need hope yes in the book you talk
about the hope of what can come out of
this how this is also withering and real
and raw and hard
and mean or neglectful but ultimately
all negative how do you get to the point
where you know what is the mechanism
what is the what is the dynamic that
allows us to move from a place that is
so dark to anything that approaches
light but this is what happens when you
go to a crisis it is danger and
opportunity and when you go to the Hope
what starts to happen is that you begin
to the people for me who've managed to
transform this will tell you we have a
relationship today that is so much
stronger than what we ever had more open
more honest more intense more alive
we wish I didn't have to go through this
but this took us you know for a ride and
what we you know I am I would not have
wanted to go back to the marriage that
we had but you depends when you asked if
I asked this in one or two years right
after no what I went to do is I looked
at people 5 10 15 years later and they
didn't say you know when she cheated on
me when they said we had a crisis it
became a wee story and we rewrote our
story after this crisis and we became
the authors of the new chapters of our
life and you know we we really you know
it's something needed to change and this
is what made it happen it becomes a very
different way of talking about this
those are the people who when you go
later they say you know there's such a
sense of victory over not having let
this thing ruin them and over having
actually turned it into a better
relationship it's not semantics it's
it's subjective it's it's substantial
when they're saying it's our story it's
because that's what they decided to do
with it yes how do you consider happy
endings and it started the question it
started then they crossed it out what do
you consider half the endings but they
crossed that out
although that would have been an
interesting question also so happy
endings how do they fit into this I mean
what I just described is a kind of happy
ending a happy ending to to the way that
the story starts very dark and becomes
hopeful that's one version if I don't
understand I thought he was the the
question was going to like does that
count as cheating oh that's not what
they meant that's just where my head is
I think that there may be like how do
you how do you how do you find something
positive in this and that's what you
were just talking about but I'm saying
the reason I ask it again in this way is
because it's a little definitional right
you know I don't think of it in terms of
happy and right no it's not that's what
we want we want we want it to be better
we want that if we're gonna go in there
and we're going to do the therapy after
something like this we want to come out
on the other side better right that's
how weird and sometimes the better is
with you with my partner in the way that
I just described and sometimes the
better is that I decided this was not
the relationship I wanted to be in and I
was going to love differently and be
loved differently than what you and I
had indeed in together I think that for
me this is not about happy ending but it
is something that is an important point
is that we still in our society consider
longevity the marker of success of a
couple I'm married 35 years half the
time people clap like I'm some relic of
the past you know you know like like I
did it like you know and some
relationships end and they were good
they accomplished what they needed to
accomplish people had children together
people dealt with illness people buried
their parents people dealt with
earthquakes people dealt with economic
downturns people supported each other
these were strong good relationships and
they end
and I think that to me is an ending that
needs to become included that but if by
definition when it ends we say it failed
it's a failed marriage we are not doing
service neither to the marriage nor to
the commitment and the endurance that
people have sometimes for 20-30 years
and then it ends and we say it failed
it's not fair
is that PC right that would be that'll
be the pushback
that'll be the push package that's
political correctness you're trying to
make it all okay but at the end of the
day there are moral absolutes and you
get married
it says till death do us part anything
short of that is failure this cheating
is failure you can spin it any way you
want maybe we will move past it when we
will stay together but it's theirs I'm
not getting any I'm not learning
anything from it if somebody cheated on
me this is about what they learned
because they were the problem it this is
hard wired stuff in people yes since the
1300s when you know marriage came into
common existence can I give you a few
others that were really hardwired and
equally moral yes virginity how many
come on Hamid they are plenty of people
here in this room who remember what it
would have been like morally if you had
had sex before marriage so we used to
marry and had sex for the first time now
you marry and you stop having sex with
others and that was a moral in
homosexuality a moral and a
pathologizing one I mean they have been
so many you know monogamy monogamy was
one person for life for all of history I
have patients who tell me you know I am
monogamous in all my relationships and
it makes perfect sense to them that's a
sociopath I know they have had two
marriages they were monogamous in every
marriage but all right that's not what I
thought No
but these were absolutes the idea that
it would be one person for life no now
it is one person at a time the idea that
when you married you couldn't live even
if you were miserable and beaten to pulp
you couldn't live especially as a woman
because let's face it this topic of
infidelity is not a gender equal story
this is a story that has a double
standard throughout history men
practically had license to cheat and
women were punished for everything if
she seduced him if she was the lover and
if you know there is no homewrecker in
the masculine I mean this whole
conversation is is rigged from from all
kinds of moral relative things so the
fact that some people would say it is
wrong it is not what you promised it is
not in our contract is a given but for
many people the story is not about
broken contracts it's about broken
hearts and they need help to mend their
broken hearts and rage and wrath and
moral judgment on them and on their
partner and on everything they have
created before doesn't help them so we
need if it's that pervasive we need
something a little bit more
compassionate that doesn't make it right
that doesn't condone it but it's helpful
how did I like your push box it's good
it was kind of half-hearted to be honest
with you I mean the the because I just
don't I just don't believe that I've
never believed it I've always thought
that I believe that there is first of
all here's what I believe but here's
what here's why I'm giving some context
to it I see so much of this you know I
mean I've spent years and years of my
life cataloging disastrous marriages you
know because they spawned so many great
crime stories that I've covered over the
years and intimacy between two people as
always the basis of some of the most
bizarre human behavior but I do think
that anybody who's been married while
this Thanksgiving it'll be sixteen years
for me and Christina for my for my wife
and I came from a family where you know
my mother and father were you know my
father used to wince when he would think
about life before he was married and it
was real like he really believed that he
really was like yeah no I I was not
married at some point but I've been
married my entire life to Matilda and
they were of a generation where I don't
care what happened now being physically
abused being emotionally abused that
even for their generation that was
understood as something that was never
supposed to be acceptable supposed to be
acceptable but at the end of the day it
is so hard to stay married it's hard for
people and people don't know this when
they get into it they don't talk about
it while they're in it unless they're
like drunk or there's some flashpoint
that everybody knows about so they might
as well talk about it anyway and it's
one of probably I think one of the most
common realities that is ignored in
normative behavior if you if you think
about it I mean you know you guys all
say you have except for their weird
imbalance with the hands thing I mean
you know if you're in a relationship
people tend not to talk about what is
the most true thing about the
relationship which is that it's work and
that it's hard and that bad things are
going to happen
you're gonna have to find a way through
and what I've seen in the spike of
divorces which is new ish right it's
easier to get divorced now it's not as
expensive to get divorced now no
no-fault divorce is much more prevalent
the social acceptance of it is better
now than it was a generation ago but
when you hear people while they're
getting out of it I'm often very
unimpressed by their reasons and I'm of
the school of thought to the person who
asked the question I don't get involved
I spend enough time in controversy in my
day job in my personal life I try not to
get involved in these situations but I
often find the reasons that people are
getting out or really a really Pettit
especially when they have kids you know
and especially when it's male that most
traditional male dynamic of like you
know the kids get to be like 11 12 13
and all of a sudden some guy starts to
feel like he doesn't have his mojo
anymore and you know he needs to be
revitalized and all of a sudden there's
like some new person in their life that
could be their kid I mean we've all seen
this play out so many times and while I
don't judge the behavior I do think that
it speaks to a fundamental
misunderstanding of the work involved
and what the promises and the duty is
that's involved but all these things are
subjective that's what drew me to the
book was that you create a framework of
some objectivity the way you have to
look at these dynamics if you want to
make sense of them you can make them
whatever you want if you don't want it
to be rational but if you want it to be
rational you have to look at it but this
is probably what's harder than this
what's harder than this look this one is
among the most painful experiences you
have because it is with someone that
you're intimate with so to be betrayed
by and definitionally you know you make
a case in here not to make a
definitional but definitionally this is
the worst thing that you can do I'll
tell you what's harder but this is me
personally and this may be why I
developed more but not positive but more
resilient attitude to this experience
you know and I never thought that with
this
were connected but one day it kind of so
I am a child of two Holocaust survivors
both my parents were the sole survivors
of their entire family they were
betrayed not by their partners but by
humanity and they could have remained
that dead inside not dead surviving but
without any any jewelry of anything to
strive for and yet they chose the other
side and I came from a community in
Antwerp that was all Holocaust survivors
and they were two groups those who did
not die and those who came back to life
and I learned how people come true love
again trust again have children because
you know in that world you should better
not have kids if that's what's going to
happen and that gave me a real faith
that this is possible they never doubted
it that life was worth living and love
again and make families and have sex and
have pleasure and go dance and all of
that that aliveness and from that place
I draw my inspiration when I work with
people who are shattered and think like
this whole life that they've built has
just been smitten to pieces and then I
start to rebuild it because I know it's
possible not for everybody and not all
the time but there is absolutely nothing
PC about that I believe that that is a
true source of resilience
because when people say when Trust is
broken how do you heal and I think to
myself you know I'm going back to Viktor
Frankl and I'm going back to my parents
this is the story has been written this
is not the first time now sometimes you
will heal it with somebody else not with
the person who just broke it but I
that's it I've said it I'm gonna read
another place
it's called from suspicions to certainty
certainty is searing but knowing
suspicion is its own kind of agony when
we begin to suspect that our beloved is
duplicitous we become relentless
scavengers sniffing our desires
carelessly strewn clothes and clues
sophisticated surveillance expert we
track the minute changes in his face the
indifference in her voice the unfamiliar
smell of his shirt her lackluster kiss
we tally up the slightest incongruity
I kept wondering what she had so many
early meetings at the office when she's
supposed to start at 10:00 her Instagram
posts didn't match where she said she
was dates don't lie he was puzzling that
he had to take a shower and put on
deodorant before going for his run
that's a rookie mistake
[Laughter]
all of a sudden she was so eager to
invite Brad and Judy to dinner went for
so long she didn't even like them does
he really need his phone in the bathroom
at first we may keep our questions to
ourselves afraid to falsely accuse if
we're wrong even more afraid to face the
facts if we right but eventually the
desire to know Trump's the fear of
knowing and we begin to probe and to
interrogate we test asking questions to
which the GPS has already given
irrefutable answers we set traps every
dark secret I'll discover better by
pretending since a scheming figure who
in Mozart's classic opera we act like we
know when we only fear Anton tells Josie
he has proof that she has been sleeping
around there's no point in continuing to
lie about it you can tell me he says I
already know everything but it's a bluff
feeling caught Josie tells him more than
he ever had bargained for now he can't
get the images out of his head in a
common twist
Josie tells me that initially Anton's
suspicions had been unfounded however as
his snooping increased so did her
frustrations and evasiveness eventually
resenting her life under surveillance
she says he was so convinced I had been
cheating on him all along that I decided
to do it for real that's not a positive
piece I should find a hopeful piece I
should look for a hopeful piece
I'll wait I love that you were I've made
a note that you consulted on the
Showtime series the affair and that
scares me that that series they shot it
out on Long Island right that's that's
where I live and that is that what did
you think when you started reading
through what they wanted to do that I'll
buy you some time to find something more
positive than that dirge that you just
read to was there the when you started
reading what this was gonna be about
what resonated with you in that story
you guys know the show the affair right
okay so one of the lines that became
very clear to me and one of the most
surprising findings when I began to look
at this thing as why do people in happy
marriages cheat he has a very good
relationship he loves his kids he's
happy with his wife he doesn't like his
father-in-law okay is that sometimes
when you turn to the gaze of another it
isn't because you're looking for another
partner but it is because you're looking
for another self and he wasn't trying to
leave his wife as much as he was trying
to leave who he had himself become and
that doesn't make him likable or
anything like that but that notion that
this man had a very he had an enviable
life living in in Park Slope you know
the hole he had an enviable life what
was what and this had nothing to do with
his marriage it has nothing to do with
the relationship with his wife so it was
his it was what it was the fact that she
had decided you know that when he met
his wife in college he needed structure
in his life he needed somebody who was
going to ground him he needed somebody
who came from a family that that could
provide something he needed someone to
gig and then and then you know his
demons caught up with him but that you
only know in series three series one
what you know is that he meets this
and she meets this man and she lost a
child and I did learn to ask many people
who are in Affairs have you lost someone
in the last two three years in your life
because I began to see that for many
people the presence of mortality is what
will often push them to do that thing
that they never thought they would do it
could be in all kinds of parts of life
this is just one situation and a parent
who dies
a friend who goes too soon and bad news
at the doctor I can't tell you the
amount of people who have seen have
affairs when they have been sick
themselves and they come out of there
something about mortality makes people
say is this it is there more am I going
to live like that and and it gives them
that that boldness that they would never
have had before and so I start to see
her she had a great relationship with
her husband also it's like you know they
were they were they they had lost a
child and there was a grieving and and
that she she couldn't leave herself
anymore she saw it everywhere and so she
throws herself into this complete
abandoned where she you know and they
destroy two sets of families I mean it's
a but you know you're gonna make me
again talk and it's not gonna be
positive it's not gonna be able I don't
make you say I don't think anybody could
make you say anything well well but here
look of course if you could be
pollyannish about this if you could be
you know if this was such an obviously
optimistic situation we wouldn't need
the genius that you apply to your book I
wouldn't have done this if I thought it
was a no-brainer and it was easy
it's the difficulty it is the need to
sometimes confront things that are hard
that make your expertise so valuable not
just in the clinical setting but for the
rest of us who just want to read through
this so you can have it in your head and
if you're open enough to challenge some
of your assumptions and not see that's
what I was trying to get to earlier I
think it's hard for people
to do that I really do I think it is
harder now eating the book changed
anything for you I am open but I have
heard so many people write to me who
have read this and it's just coming out
you know I started out I like you know
but slow you made me see things you made
me forgive my father
he made me forgive my mother you made me
understand I have a person in there who
literally thinks that it is the worst
thing that can happen to then realize
that his father and his mother were
actually in an affair and he was the
child of that relationship
I mean people discover things about
themselves it you know and that's a
change of perspective it's not just what
do you think about is it a good thing or
a bad thing that's not the question that
is asked it's really do you do you get
to understand the complexity of the
human drama that comes through this
without having to go to the Opera and
and do you understand that when you read
this you actually will also know how to
create a relationship that can develop
the buffers to possibly prevent it or
pre-empted I think that not only do I
agree with the premise I think that what
the book does is you don't have to have
this in place in your relationship from
you to learn from the dynamics that's
surrounding how to survive it because if
it's not this crisis is going to be
something else and that was eye-opening
for me and also just the idea of what
goes into both sides of it that's
symptomatic nature you know your section
not to help you find your own section of
your book but page 226 I had marked when
the affair preserves the marriage and
the passage on 227 do you think that
might fit the bill of what you'd like to
leave you already to 26 to 26 I was
actually looking no
you see that what do you think of that
No except fit the bill for you or not
great tease though for those two pages
of the book isn't it aren't you like
what's to 26 to 27 I was gonna read you
actually from the Transformers this is
it so I want you to end the way you want
it yes
ironic as twisted as it may seem Matt
and Maggie's perspective has a logic
many people have affairs not to exit
their marriages but in order to stay in
them I have three more years till the
kid no this is this is not a happy piece
but I I have a different take on it but
go ahead do it now let's do a question
all right I may spin away but I won't
let go my heart says yes but my head
says no a gentle hug will pull me back
in for another dance is it such a sim
books better than you knew before
interviewing an author this is an
interesting crime not sure I understand
it but maybe you'll understand it last
question yeah
have you ever counseled a couple who are
themselves the perpetrators of an affair
would you consider that constructive
have I ever yes have I met couples were
both partners
we're the people who were unfaithful in
their respective relationships yes
I have not met their partners in those
situations I don't meet both if this is
the couple that shows up I will not meet
the spouses so let's be very clear and
what is the question if you
is constructive yeah what do you do with
that so one of the couples that actually
I wrote about in the book they had known
each other in college they left they
both got married they both lived at
different sides of the Atlantic and and
they reconnect and they are absolutely
torn they have kids they have young
children they have prayer partners one
has a better relationship than the other
they have no desire to leave the kids to
not be there and they are absolutely
torn and that was the conversation I
often do an entire day sessions and I
sit and I let them figure it out I and
and I just give them a safe space where
they can actually think talk maybe say
goodbye to each other which they
probably have already tried to do I'm 10
times when I meet that couple that
particular couple I don't feel like I'm
sitting with perpetrators I'm sitting
with two people who are in a crisis of
love with each other and with their
partners and I don't have an answer for
this
I can humbly lend my skills for people
to figure out their own
self-determination in their life and
that's that's what I do in those moments
I can't remember which page they're on
but you'll recognize them
noted psychotherapist mr. Rogers once
said in a time of crisis look for the
helpful people we have things that are
difficult in marriage and they often
revolve around infidelity we need the
helpful people you are one of the
helpful people thank you for writing the
book thank you for talking
[Music]
you